The following people have helped with the development of FreeDOS Editor:

Dr. Dobb's Journal: Originally wrote the application, D-Flat, which Edit is
                    based on.

Shaun Raven:        Fixed many bugs from D-Flat and made it more stable.

Joe Cosentino:      Fixed more bugs, changed the user interface around,
                    added additional features. Maintainer of EDIT 0.6
                    and EDIT 0.8 / 0.81 / 0.82 ... series: The 0.6x and
                    0.7x (x being any letter) series is Eric's spin-off.

Eric Auer:          Fixed many bugs including the file handling bugs and
                    the AltGr bug. Removed irq handlers (timer, keyboard)
                    from EDIT (0.6b, 0.6c respectively). Expanding tabs on
                    load and tabs-as-char mode added (0.6d). Fixed shift-bs
                    crash and drive selection, removed pTab/sTab (0.6e).
                    Plain BIOS support for ctrl-ins, alt-backspace in 0.7,
                    as well as ^P+char handling and time seconds display.
                    Updates and bugfixes for 0.7a and 0.7b: Fixed tabs-as-
                    chars loading, introduced viewer mode...
                    Updates and bugfixes for 0.7c: swapped selection end
                    handling, cursor range checking, improved "try again"
                    save dialog, nonblinking clock, ctrl-f and alt-digit
                    shortcuts (find, go to window 1..9), static window
                    list order, int 2a.84 idle calls, ASCII table...
                    Updates for 0.7d: upcase/downcase block, count lines
                    words and bytes in block.

Jeremy Davis:       Added the Control+Break Handler, added additional video
                    functions.

Patric Rufflar:     Made EDIT self-contained again by collecting all the
                    library source files and fixed some bugs (AltGr, 0.6+).
                    
Aitor Santamaria:   D-Flat is taken out as standalone libraries, as
                    FreeDOS D-Flat+, which are compiled and distributed
                    separatedly as TUI creation libraries.
                    Some minor bugs fixed.
                    EDIT 0.9 series, based on DFlat+.

